
                        Boss looking for three more players
                        Paul Eaton 
                        Gerard Houllier today admitted he wants to sign "at 
                        least three players" before the start of the next 
                        Premiership season. 

                        The Liverpool boss knows he will be starting the new 
                        campaign without Patrik Berger, Vegard Heggem and 
                        Bernard Diomede - all of whom will leave the club on 
                        free transfers - and he is conscious of the need to 
                        replace these players before the big kick off. 

                        "I think we need at least three players. Patrick Berger, 
                        Bernard Diomede and Vegard Heggam are all out of 
                        contract in the summer," he said. 

                        "Abel Xavier has already left the club. We will need to 
                        replace these players." 

                        Houllier was back at his Melwood desk today already 
                        planning for the new campaign, and he reiterated his 
                        view that there is no need for wholesale changes to the 
                        squad despite his side's failure to qualify for the 
                        Champions League. 

                        "If someone had said to us four years ago we would twice 
                        qualify for the Champions League and we would win six 
                        trophies, I don't think there would have been any 
                        complaints," Houllier insisted. 

                        "For the last four years we have been competing for the 
                        Champions League spots. What I said yesterday still 
                        stands. There are some positives from this season and 
                        negatives. 

                        "The positive is winning a cup final against Manchester 
                        United. Nobody will take that away from us. Also after a 
                        difficult period in the middle of the season, we managed 
                        to finish the season stronger. 

                        "Our problems were at home. We conceded too many goals 
                        and we could have scored more. You expect a team that's 
                        developing and progressing to have fits and starts and 
                        that's what's happened. 

                        "You must remember the average age of the team yesterday 
                        was just 24. I also think we paid because for half of 
                        the season we were without Stephane Henchoz." 

