Questions that I asked:


Even though we're dealing with Data-centric files, we must consider Document centric files otherwise we can't regenerate any character data outside tags, right?
	Only worry about Data Centric files to begin with.
	Remember that Data-Centric files have no mixed content or
	whitespace, BUT they do have to take into account the order
	they are given in the xml file (it could implicitly be the order
	some coordinates are plotted or temperature readings at fixed intervals
	

Should the emphasis be on creating a lossless transformation or on an easy to use Graphical Interface?

	You COULD have something that runs off the command line and get a good mark for it, but it must
	be feature-rich and be able to accept complex input
	Not recommended in any case
	Of course, get a working program before getting into GUI coding
	Good idea to finish technical code before end of term so that no worries over the holiday

Do databases have support for pattern matching? More generally, can XML Schema specify constraints that Database 
Schemas cannot?

	You can form almost any constraints, but it would have to be using TRIGGERS (stored procedures 
	which are invoked e.g. when an insert is carried out)
	Don't worry about these for now, but they may be useful later.

How much cutting edge research must there be in this project?

	You should implement new ideas that reasearchers haven't given information on how to implement.
	But you don't have to invent your own brilliant ideas
	Cobbling together of given APIs must be done in a systematic and technically sound manner

What are the regulations on intellectual property rights?

	Technically it is owned by the college but people have been known to use their ideas outside of college
	Just be a bit careful.

What DBMS should be used?

	POSTGres would suffice at the start
	Later on you may wish to use SQL Server thought it should be a big problem.
	One bug with a certain version of PSQL (not sure if fixed) is that JDBC doesn't detect the representation 		of foreign keys (not quite sure what this means)
	SQL Server's interface is a little bit more cumbersome apparently


Are there 2 major areas to the problem: Schema conversion and Importing data?

	Not really. Once you've figured out the schema conversion the data importing should be a huge problem.
	(Not convinced though)

Is there anything you require on this project site?

	Yes, you should have a project site even if it's not to do with websites.
	Put references, files etc. here
	Actually, I'm going to put my report online so this should contain all that stuff.
	Put any good self-containing info there (e.g. Relational Algebra axioms)



OTHER POINTS
-----------

-Amiri (amiri@doc...) has been allocated as the 2nd marker. Situated in room 428 (which is unlabelled)

- Even if you don't have time to do certain things, showing that you've considered them and know that they could be done given more time will only help.
But don't list a load of things you did't do (?)

(I'm not really sure what is meant by the following, but it is important nonetheless)
I would be good if you could support all the Relational Algebra operators

There are 4 ways to map an xml file containing records of people with a gender attribute

A male and female table
A single table with a gender attribute.
++?
(I suppose the other two might have been to do with how to map the other way, but I'm not sure. Ask again later.)


























